A forward-looking, balanced ICT strategy is defined, documented, periodically updated, approved by the management body and aligned with the business and risk strategies (e.g. risk tolerance).
Senior management of the business line(s) is adequately involved in the definition of the supervised entity’s strategic ICT priorities and aware of the development, design and initiation of major business strategies and initiatives.
The ICT strategy provides a holistic view of the current ICT environment, the future direction, and the initiatives required to migrate to the desired future environment (incl. third party dependencies).
The ICT strategy has an acceptable level of detail and contains measurable goals for the most important ICT areas.
The ICT strategy is supported by concrete implementation plans (e.g. deliverables, important milestones and resource planning, dedicated budgets). The implementation plans are realistic and communicated to all relevant staff (including contractors and third party providers where applicable and relevant).
Portfolios of ICT-enabled investment programs and projects required to achieve specific strategic business objectives are actively monitored by relevant stakeholders.
The supervised entity analyses existing and emerging technologies.
The ICT risk management framework includes a digital operational resilience strategy setting out how the framework shall be implemented. To that end, the digital operational resilience strategy includes methods to address ICT risk and attain specific ICT objectives, by: (a) explaining how the ICT risk management framework supports the financial entity’s business strategy and objectives; (b) establishing the risk tolerance level for ICT risk, in accordance with the risk appetite of the financial entity, and analysing the impact tolerance for ICT disruptions; (c) setting out clear information security objectives, including key performance indicators and key risk metrics; (d) explaining the ICT reference architecture and any changes needed to reach specific business objectives; (e) outlining the different mechanisms put in place to detect ICT-related incidents, prevent their impact and provide protection from it; (f) evidencing the current digital operational resilience situation on the basis of the number of major ICT-related incidents reported and the effectiveness of preventive measures; (g) implementing digital operational resilience testing, in accordance with Chapter IV of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554; (h) outlining a communication strategy in the event of ICT-related incidents the disclosure of which is required in accordance with Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554. The supervised entity monitors the effectiveness of the implementation of their digital operational resilience strategy and has a process in place to understand the level of ICT risk exposure, in particular in relation to critical or important functions.
The supervised entity has in place an internal governance and control framework that ensures an effective and prudent management of ICT risk, in accordance with Article 6(4) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, in order to achieve a high level of digital operational resilience.
In accordance with Article 5(2) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the management body of the supervised entity defines, approves, oversees and is responsible for the implementation of all arrangements related to the ICT risk management framework referred to in Article 6(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554. In particular, the management body: (a) bears the ultimate responsibility for managing the financial entity’s ICT risk; (b) puts in place policies that aim to ensure the maintenance of high standards of availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality, of data; (c) sets clear roles and responsibilities for all ICT-related functions and establish appropriate governance arrangements to ensure effective and timely communication, cooperation and coordination among those functions; (d) bears the overall responsibility for setting and approving the digital operational resilience strategy as referred to in Article 6(8) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, including the determination of the appropriate risk tolerance level of ICT risk of the financial entity, as referred to in Article 6(8)(b) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554; (e) approves, oversees and periodically reviews the implementation of the financial entity’s ICT business continuity policy and ICT response and recovery plans, referred to, respectively, in Article 11(1) and (3) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, which may be adopted as a dedicated specific policy forming an integral part of the financial entity’s overall business continuity policy and response and recovery plan; (f) approves and periodically reviews the financial entity’s ICT internal audit plans, ICT audits and material modifications to them; (g) allocates and periodically reviews the appropriate budget to fulfil the financial entity’s digital operational resilience needs in respect of all types of resources, including relevant ICT security awareness programmes and digital operational resilience training referred to in Article 13(6) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, and ICT skills for all staff; (h) approves and periodically reviews the financial entity’s policy on arrangements regarding the use of ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers; (i) puts in place, at corporate level, reporting channels enabling ICT to be duly informed of the following: (i) arrangements concluded with ICT third-party service providers on the use of ICT services, (ii) any relevant planned material changes regarding the ICT third-party service providers, (iii) the potential impact of such changes on the critical or important functions subject to those arrangements, including a risk analysis summary to assess the impact of those changes, and at least major ICT-related incidents and their impact, as well as response, recovery and corrective measures.
Members of the management body of the supervised entity actively keep up to date with sufficient knowledge and skills to understand and assess ICT risk and its impact on the operations of the financial entity, including by following specific training on a regular basis, commensurate to the ICT risk being managed.
The supervised entity includes in its human resource policy or other relevant policies all of the following ICT security related elements: (a) the identification and assignment of any specific ICT security responsibilities; (b) requirements for staff of the financial entity and of the ICT third-party service providers using or accessing ICT assets of the financial entity to: (i) be informed about, and adhere to, the financial entity's ICT security policies, procedures, and protocols; (ii) be aware of the reporting channels put in place by the financial entity for the detection of anomalous behaviour, including, where applicable, the reporting channels established in line with Directive (EU) 2019/1937 of the European Parliament and of the Council; (iii) for the staff, to return to the financial entity, upon termination of employment, all ICT assets and tangible information assets in their possession that belong to the financial entity.
As part of the ICT risk management framework referred to in Article 6(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the supervised entity has identified, classified and adequately documented all ICT supported business functions, roles and responsibilities, the information assets and ICT assets supporting those functions, and their roles and dependencies in relation to ICT risk. The supervised entity reviews as needed, and at least yearly, the adequacy of this classification and of any relevant documentation.
The supervised entity maintains an inventory of all ICT supported business functions, roles and responsibilities, the information assets and ICT assets supporting those functions, and their roles and dependencies in relation to ICT risk. This inventory is updated periodically and every time any major change in the network and information system infrastructure, in the processes or procedures affecting its ICT supported business functions, information assets or ICT assets occurs.
The supervised entity has identified all information assets and ICT assets, including those on remote sites, network resources and hardware equipment, and maps those considered critical. The supervised entity has mapped the configuration of the information assets and ICT assets and the links and interdependencies between the different information assets and ICT assets.
The supervised entity maintains an inventory of all information assets and ICT assets, including those on remote sites, network resources and hardware equipment. This inventory is updated periodically and every time any major change in the network and information system infrastructure, in the processes or procedures affecting its ICT supported business functions, information assets or ICT assets occurs.
The supervised entity maintains an inventory of all processes that are dependent on ICT third-party service providers, and identified interconnections with ICT third-party service providers that provide services that support critical or important functions. This inventory is updated periodically and every time any major change in the network and information system infrastructure, in the processes or procedures affecting its ICT supported business functions, information assets or ICT assets occurs.
The supervised entity conducts on a regular basis, and at least yearly, a specific ICT risk assessment on all legacy ICT systems and, in any case before and after connecting technologies, applications or systems.
The supervised entity has in place a sound, comprehensive and well-documented ICT risk management framework as part of its overall risk management system, which enables it to address ICT risk quickly, efficiently and comprehensively and to ensure a high level of digital operational resilience.
The ICT risk management framework includes at least strategies, policies, procedures, ICT protocols and tools that are necessary to duly and adequately protect all information assets and ICT assets, including computer software, hardware, servers, as well as to protect all relevant physical components and infrastructures, such as premises, data centres and sensitive designated areas, to ensure that all information assets and ICT assets are adequately protected from risks including damage and unauthorised access or usage.
The supervised entity performs a risk assessment upon each major change in the network and information system infrastructure, in the processes or procedures affecting its ICT supported business functions, information assets or ICT assets.
The supervised entity has, in the context of the digital operational resilience strategy referred to in Article 6(8) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, defined a holistic ICT multi-vendor strategy, at group or entity level, showing key dependencies on ICT third-party service providers and explaining the rationale behind the procurement mix of ICT third-party service providers.
The supervised entity assigns the responsibility for managing and overseeing ICT risk to a control function and ensures an appropriate level of independence of such control function in order to avoid conflicts of interest. The supervised entity ensures appropriate segregation and independence of ICT risk management functions, control functions, and internal audit functions, according to the three lines of defence model, or an internal risk management and control model.
The supervised entity performs post incident review after major ICT-related incidents (in accordance with the requirements of Article 13(2) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
Senior ICT staff reports at least annually to the management body on important findings and lessons (incl. remediation recommendations). These findings and lessons are derived from, among other sources: post incident reviews, digital operational resilience testing, along with challenges faced upon the activation of ICT business continuity plans and ICT response and recovery plans.
The supervised entity's ICT risk management policies and procedures contain an indication of the approval of the risk tolerance level for ICT risk established in accordance with Article 6(8)(b), of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
The supervised entity's ICT risk management policies and procedures contain a procedure and a methodology to conduct the ICT risk assessment, identifying: (i) vulnerabilities and threats that affect or may affect the supported business functions, the ICT systems and ICT assets supporting those functions; (ii) the quantitative or qualitative indicators to measure the impact and likelihood of the vulnerabilities and threats referred to in point (i).
The supervised entity's ICT risk management policies and procedures contain the procedure to identify, implement, and document ICT risk treatment measures for the ICT risks identified and assessed, including the determination of ICT risk treatment measures necessary to bring ICT risk within the risk tolerance level. The procedure ensures (a) the monitoring of the effectiveness of the ICT risk treatment measures implemented; (b) the assessment of whether the established risk tolerance levels of the financial entity have been attained; (c) the assessment of whether the financial entity has taken actions to correct or improve those measures where necessary.
The supervised entity's ICT risk management policies and procedures contain for the residual ICT risks that are still present following the implementation of the ICT risk treatment measures: (i) provisions on the identification of those residual ICT risks; (ii) the assignment of roles and responsibilities regarding: (1) the acceptance of the residual ICT risks that exceed the financial entity’s risk tolerance level; (2) for the review process referred to in point (iv) below; (iii) the development of an inventory of the accepted residual ICT risks, including a justification for their acceptance; (iv) provisions on the review of the accepted residual ICT risks at least once a year, including: (1) the identification of any changes to the residual ICT risks; (2) the assessment of available mitigation measures; (3) the assessment of whether the reasons justifying the acceptance of residual ICT risks are still valid and applicable at the date of the review.
The supervised entity's ICT risk management policies and procedures contain provisions on the monitoring of: (i) any changes to the ICT risk and cyber threat landscape; (ii) internal and external vulnerabilities and threats; (iii) new technological developments, with a view to understanding their potential impact on ICT risk, digital operational resilience and security requirements; (iv) ICT risk of the financial entity that enables prompt detection of changes that could affect its ICT risk profile.
The supervised entity's ICT risk management policies and procedures contain provisions on a process to ensure that any changes to the business strategy and the digital operational resilience strategy of the financial entity are taken into account.
The supervised entity, on a continuous basis, identifies all sources of ICT risk, in particular the risk exposure to and from other financial entities, and assess cyber threats and ICT vulnerabilities relevant to their ICT supported business functions, information assets and ICT assets. The supervised entity reviews on a regular basis, and at least yearly, the risk scenarios impacting it.
The ICT risk management framework is documented and reviewed at least once a year, as well as upon the occurrence of major ICT-related incidents, and following supervisory instructions or conclusions derived from relevant digital operational resilience testing or audit processes. ICT is continuously improved on the basis of lessons derived from implementation and monitoring. A comprehensive and detailed ICT audit universe is established.
The ICT risk management framework is subject to internal audit by auditors on a regular basis in line with the supervised entity’s audit plan. The auditors possess sufficient knowledge, skills and expertise in ICT risk, as well as appropriate independence.
The audit plan includes critical ICT risks identified by the supervised entity (including those of outsourced activities) and takes into consideration the results of previous audits. The frequency and focus of ICT audits is commensurate to the ICT risk of the financial entity.
Based on the conclusions from the internal audit review, the supervised entity has established a formal follow-up process, including rules for the timely verification and remediation of critical ICT audit findings and progress reports being periodically reviewed by the senior management and/or the audit committee.
There is procedure for ad hoc reporting to the management body based on the criticality of the findings reported by ICT audits.
An ICT reporting process is designed with clear structural and operational rules, defining responsibilities, subjects of reports, deadlines, communication channels, etc. and ensuring that the ICT reporting is performed with the appropriate level of accuracy, integrity, completeness, comprehensiveness, clarity, usefulness and timeliness.
Secured channels are used for the distribution of ICT reports.
The ICT reporting system includes the reporting of the ICT service provider (e.g. cloud service provider), in case of an outsourced activity.
ICT reporting is performed on a regular basis, providing information to relevant recipients (e.g. senior management) to identify, assess, monitor and manage the supervised entity’s ICT risk considering the approved risk appetite.
As part of its ICT risk management framework, the supervised entity adopts, and regularly reviews a strategy on ICT third-party risk, taking into account the multi-vendor strategy referred to in Article 6(9) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, where applicable. The strategy on ICT third-party risk includes a policy on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers (the ICT TP usage policy) and applies on an individual basis and, where relevant, on a sub-consolidated and consolidated basis. The management body, on the basis of an assessment of the overall risk profile of the supervised entity and the scale and complexity of the business services, regularly reviews the risks identified in respect to contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions.
As part of its ICT risk management framework, the supervised entity maintains and updates at entity level, and at sub-consolidated and consolidated levels, a register of information in relation to all contractual arrangements on the use of ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers. The contractual arrangements are appropriately documented, distinguishing between those that cover ICT services supporting critical or important functions and those that do not.
The ICT TP usage policy takes into account the size and the overall risk profile of the supervised entity, and the nature, scale and elements of increased or reduced complexity of its services, activities and operations, including elements relating to: (a) the type of ICT services included in the contractual arrangement on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers (the ‘contractual arrangement’) between the supervised entity and the ICT third-party service provider; (b) the location of the ICT third-party service provider or the location of its parent company; (c) whether the ICT services supporting critical or important functions are provided by an ICT third-party service provider located within a Member State or in a third country, also considering the location from where the ICT services are provided and the location where the data is processed and stored.
The policy takes into account the size and the overall risk profile of the supervised entity, and the nature, scale and elements of increased or reduced complexity of its services, activities and operations, including elements relating to: (a) the nature of the data shared with the ICT third-party service provider; (b) whether the ICT third-party service provider is part of the same group as the supervised entity to which the services are provided; (c) the use of ICT third-party service providers that are authorised, registered or subject to supervision or oversight by a competent authority in a Member State or subject to the oversight framework under Chapter V, Section II, of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, and the use of ICT third-party service providers that are not.
The ICT TP usage policy takes into account the size and the overall risk profile of the supervised entity, and the nature, scale and elements of increased or reduced complexity of its services, activities and operations, including elements relating to: (a) the use of ICT third-party service providers that are authorised, registered or subject to supervision or oversight by a supervisory authority in a third country, and the use of ICT third-party service providers that are not; (b) whether the provision of ICT services supporting critical or important functions are concentrated to a single ICT third-party service provider or a small number of such service providers; (c) the transferability of the ICT services supporting critical or important functions to another ICT third-party service provider, including as a result of technology specificities; (d) the potential impact of disruptions in the provision of the ICT services supporting critical or important functions on the continuity of the supervised entity’s activities and on the availability of its services.
The management body reviews the ICT TP usage policy at least once a year and update it where necessary. Changes made to the policy are implemented in a timely manner and as soon as it is possible within the relevant contractual arrangements. The supervised entity documents the planned timeline for the implementation.
The ICT TP usage policy establishes or refers to a methodology for determining which ICT services support critical or important functions. The policy also specifies when this assessment is to be conducted and reviewed.
The ICT TP usage policy clearly assigns the internal responsibilities for the approval, management, control, and documentation of relevant contractual arrangements and ensures that appropriate skills, experience and knowledge are maintained within the supervised entity to effectively oversee the relevant contractual arrangements, including the ICT services provided under those arrangements.
The ICT TP usage policy clearly identifies the role or member of senior management responsible for monitoring the relevant contractual arrangements. The policy specifies how that role or member of senior management cooperates with the control functions, unless ICT is part of it, and sets out the reporting lines to the management body, including the nature of the information to report and the documents to provide. ICT also sets out the frequency of such reporting.
The ICT TP usage policy ensures that the contractual arrangements are consistent with the following: (a) the ICT risk management framework referred to in Article 6 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554; (b) the information security policy referred to in Article 9(4) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554; (c) the ICT business continuity policy referred to in Article 11 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554; (d) the requirements on incident reporting set out in Article 19 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
The ICT TP usage policy requires that ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT third party service providers are subject to independent review and are included in the audit plan.
The ICT TP usage policy explicitly specifies that the contractual arrangements: (a) do not relieve the supervised entity and its management body of its regulatory obligations and its responsibilities to its clients; (b) are not to prevent effective supervision of a supervised entity and are not to contravene any supervisory restrictions on services and activities; (c) are to require that the ICT third party service providers cooperate with the competent authorities; (d) are to require that the supervised entity, its auditors, and competent authorities have effective access to data and premises relating to the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions.
For ICT assets or services operated by an ICT third-party service provider, the supervised entity has identified and implemented the necessary requirements to maintain digital operational resilience, in accordance with the results of the data classification and ICT risk assessment, as specified in the Article 11(2)(k) of the RTS on ICT risk management framework.
The ICT TP usage policy specifies the requirements, including the rules, the responsibilities and the processes, for each main phase of the lifecycle of the contractual arrangement, covering at least the following: (a) the responsibilities of the management body, including its involvement, as appropriate, in the decision-making process on the use of ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided by ICT third-party service providers; (b) the planning of contractual arrangements, including the risk assessment, the due diligence as set out in Articles 5 and 6 of the RTS to specify the policy on ICT services and the approval process regarding new or material changes to contractual arrangements as set out in Article 8(4) of the RTS to specify the policy on ICT services. The risk assessment is done at financial entity level and, where applicable, at consolidated and sub-consolidated level before a contractual arrangement is concluded. The risk assessment takes into account all the relevant requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, and all the risk posed by the provision of ICT services as detailed in article 5 para. 2 of the RTS to specify the policy on ICT services. c) For ICT services supporting critical or important functions, the due diligence verifies the existence of risk mitigation and business continuity measures and how their functioning within the ICT third-party service provider is ensured.
The ICT TP usage policy specifies the requirements, including the rules, the responsibilities and the processes, for each main phase of the lifecycle of the contractual arrangement, covering at least the following: (a) the involvement of business units, internal controls and other relevant units in respect of contractual arrangements; (b) the implementation, monitoring and management of contractual arrangements as referred to in Articles 7, 8 and 9 of the RTS to specify the policy on ICT services, including at consolidated and sub-consolidated level, where applicable.
The ICT TP usage policy specifies the requirements, including the rules, the responsibilities and the processes, for each main phase of the lifecycle of the contractual arrangement, covering at least the following: (a) the documentation and record-keeping, taking into account the requirements with regard to the register of information laid down in Article 28(3) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554; (b) the exit strategies and termination processes as set out in Article 10 of the RTS to specify the policy on ICT services.
The ICT TP usage policy details which elements are to be used to assess the required level of assurance on the ICT third-party service provider’s performance among: (a) audits or independent assessments performed by the financial entity itself or on its behalf; (b) the use of independent audit reports made on request by the ICT third-party service provider; (c) the use of audit reports made by the internal audit function of the ICT third-party service provider; (d) the use of appropriate third-party certifications; (e) the use of other relevant information available to the financial entity or other information provided by the ICT third-party service provider.
The ICT TP usage policy specifies the appropriate measures to identify, prevent and manage actual or potential conflicts of interests arising from the use of ICT third-party service providers before entering relevant contractual arrangements and provide for an ongoing monitoring of conflicts of interests.
Where ICT services are provided by ICT intra-group service providers, the ICT TP usage policy specifies that decisions on conditions, including the financial conditions, for the ICT services supporting critical or important functions are taken objectively.
The ICT TP usage policy specifies that the relevant contractual arrangement shall be written and shall include all the elements set out by Article 30(2) and 30(3) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554. The policy also includes elements regarding requirements applicable to financial entities as per Article 1(1)(a) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, as well as other relevant Union and national law as appropriate.
The ICT TP usage policy specifies that the relevant contractual arrangements shall include information access, inspection, audit, and ICT testing rights. The policy foresees that without prejudice to the final responsibility of the supervised entity, the supervised entity shall use for this purpose: (a) its own internal audit or an appointed third party; (b) where appropriate, pooled audits and pooled ICT testing, including threat-led penetration testing, organised jointly with other contracting financial entities or firms that use ICT services of the same ICT third-party service provider, that are performed by them and these contracting financial entities or firms or by a third party appointed by them; (c) where appropriate, third-party certifications (d) where appropriate third-party or internal audit reports made available by the ICT third-party service provider.
The supervised entity does not rely solely on certifications as in 10.2 (c) or reports as in 10.2 (d) over time unless: (a) is satisfied with the audit plan of the ICT service third-party provider for the relevant contractual arrangements; (b) ensures that the scope of the certifications or audit reports cover the systems and key controls identified by the financial entity and the compliance with relevant regulatory requirements; (c) thoroughly assesses the content of the certifications or audit reports on an ongoing basis and verify that the reports or certifications are not obsolete; (d) ensures that key systems and controls are covered in future versions of the certification or audit report; (e) is satisfied with the aptitude of the certifying or auditing party; (f) is satisfied that the certifications are issued, and the audits are performed against widely recognised relevant professional standards and include a test of the operational effectiveness of the key controls in place; (g) has the contractual right to request the expansion of the scope of the certifications or audit reports to other relevant systems and controls; whereby the number and frequency of such requests for scope modification shall be reasonable and legitimate from a risk management perspective; and (h) retains the contractual right to perform individual and pooled audits at its discretion with regard to the relevant contractual arrangements and execute them in line with the contracted frequency.
The ICT TP usage policy ensures that material changes to the relevant contractual agreement shall be formalised in a written document, dated, and signed by all parties and shall specify the renewal process for contractual arrangements.
The ICT TP usage policy ensures that the relevant contractual arrangements specify the measures and key indicators to monitor, on an ongoing basis, to assess the performance of ICT third party service providers, including measures to monitor compliance with requirements regarding the confidentiality, availability, integrity and authenticity of data and information, and the compliance of the ICT third-party service providers with the financial entity’s relevant policies and procedures. The policy also specifies measures that apply when service level agreements are not met including, where appropriate contractual penalties.
The ICT TP usage policy prescribes how the supervised entity shall assess that the ICT third party service providers used for the ICT services supporting critical or important functions meets appropriate performance and quality standards in line with the contractual arrangement and the supervised entity’s own policies by ensuring that: (a) the ICT third-party service providers address appropriate reports on their activities and services provided to the supervised entity, including periodic reports, incidents reports, service delivery reports, reports on ICT security and on business continuity measures and testing; (b) the performance of ICT third-party service providers is assessed with key performance indicators, key control indicators, audits, self-certifications and independent reviews in line with the financial entity’s ICT risk management framework; (c) other relevant information is received from the ICT third-party service provider; (d) the supervised entity is notified, where appropriate, of ICT- related incidents and operational or security payment related incidents; (e) an independent review and compliance audits with legal and regulatory requirements and policies are performed.
The ICT TP usage policy prescribes that the assessment referred to in 11.2 should be documented and its results should be used to update the supervised entity's risk assessment.
The ICT TP usage policy defines the appropriate measures that the supervised entity shall adopt if ICT identifies shortcomings of the ICT third-party service provider, including ICT-related incidents and operational or security payment related incidents, in the provision of the ICT services supporting critical or important functions or the compliance with contractual arrangements or legal requirements and how the implementation of such measures shall be monitored to ensure that they are effectively complied within a defined timeframe, taking into account the materiality of the shortcomings.
Without prejudice to Article 28 (7) and (8) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the policy includes requirements for a documented exit plan for each ICT contractual arrangement on ICT services supporting critical or important functions provided by an ICT third-party service provider and its periodic review and testing, taking into account unforeseen and persistent service interruptions, inappropriate or failed service delivery or the unexpected termination of a relevant contractual arrangement. The supervised entity has ensured that the exit plan is realistic, feasible, based on plausible scenarios and reasonable assumptions and shall have a planned implementation schedule compatible with the exit and termination terms established in the relevant contractual arrangements.
The supervised entity has established an information security policy approved by the management body and aligned to the information security objectives included in the digital operational resilience strategy.
The information security policy sets the rules to protect the supervised entity’s information assets, in line with its strategy and risk appetite and is applicable to all employees and third parties accessing information.
The information security policy refers to i) ensuring the security of networks; ii) safeguards against intrusions and data misuse; iii) preserving the availability, authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality of data, including via the use of cryptographic techniques; iv) guarantying an accurate and prompt data transmission without major disruptions and undue delays.
The information security policy is communicated to all staff at all levels and contractors and its implementation is supported by appropriate investments in human and technical resources.
The information security policy specifies the consequences of non-compliance by staff of the financial entity, lists the documentation to be maintained and specifies the segregation of duties arrangements with respect to information security controls.
The supervised entity has put in place indicators to monitor the implementation of the ICT security policy and exceptions from it.
The supervised entity has defined and implemented information security measures for the assets identified in its inventory (including software, hardware and network connections) and monitor its effectiveness to be aligned with the institution’s risk tolerance and covering identified potential risks (e.g. potential fraud risk and/or possible misuses and/or abuses of confidential data).
There are regular (at least annually) information security awareness and information campaigns in place to inform all employees and contractors of the supervised entity. Explaining the safe use and protection of the supervised entity’s ICT systems and the main ICT security (and other) risks they should be aware of, including in particular cyber threats (e. g. computer viruses, possible internal or external abuses or attacks, cyber-attacks) and their role in mitigating security breaches. Levels of understanding are measured and gaps in knowledge are identified and used to adapt or prompt additional training.
Newcomers receive mandatory training on ICT security.
ICT staff receives specific trainings on ICT security.
All employees (including senior management staff) receives compulsory digital operational resilience training, with complexity commensurate to the individual’s role/function. This may also extent to ICT third- party providers, as per Article 13(6) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
The Intranet site has a dedicated section on ICT security topics, guidelines and best practices.
Requirements on confidentiality or non-disclosure arrangements reflecting the financial entity’s needs for the protection of information for both the staff of the financial entity and of third parties are implemented, documented, and regularly reviewed.
As part of their control of access management rights, financial entity develops, documents, and implements identity and access management policies and procedures. Identity management ensures unique identification and authentication of natural persons and systems accessing the financial entities’ information to enable assignment of user access rights .
The identity and access management policies and procedures cover all of the following: * unique identity corresponding to a unique user account is assigned to each staff member of the financial entity or staff of the ICT third-party service providers accessing the information assets and ICT assets of the financial entity. A provision on user accountability, by limiting to the extent possible the use of generic and shared user accounts and ensuring that users are identifiable for the actions performed in the ICT systems at all times; * records of all identity assignments are maintained, in compliance with the applicable retention requirements. Those records shall be kept following a reorganisation of the financial entity or after the end of the contractual relationship. * lifecycle management process for identities and accounts managing the creation, change, review and update, temporary deactivation, and termination of all accounts. Where feasible and appropriate, automated solutions for the lifecycle identity management process are deployed.
The identity and access management policies and procedures cover all of the following: * The assignment of access rights to ICT assets based on need-to-know, need-to-use and least privilege principles, including for remote and emergency access. * The segregation of duties designed to prevent unjustified access to critical data or to prevent the allocation of combinations of access rights that may be used to circumvent controls. * A provision on restrictions of access to ICT assets, setting out controls and tools to prevent unauthorised access. * Account management procedures to grant, change or revoke access rights for user and generic accounts, including generic administrator accounts, including provision on all of the following: (i) Assignment of roles and responsibilities for granting, reviewing, and revoking access rights. Retention period is established, taking into account the business and information security objectives, the reasons for recording the event in the logs, and the results of the ICT risk assessment. (ii) Assignment of privileged, emergency, and administrator access on a need-to-use or an ad-hoc basis for all ICT systems. Where possible, dedicated accounts are used for the performance of administrative tasks on ICT systems. Where feasible and appropriate, automated solutions are deployed for the privilege access management. (iii) Withdrawal of access rights without undue delay upon termination of the employment or when the access is no longer necessary. (iv) Update of access rights where changes are necessary and at least once a year for all ICT systems, other than ICT systems supporting critical or important functions and at least every 6 months for ICT systems supporting critical or important functions.
The identity and access management policies and procedures cover all of the following: * Authentication methods, including: (i) the use of authentication methods commensurate to the classification established in accordance with Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 and to the overall risk profile of ICT assets and considering leading practices; (ii) the use of strong authentication methods in accordance with leading practices and techniques for remote access to the financial entity’s network, for privileged access, for access to ICT assets supporting critical or important functions or ICT assets that are publicly accessible; * Physical access controls measures including: (i) The identification and logging of natural persons that are authorised to access premises, data centres, and sensitive designated areas identified by the financial entity where ICT and information assets reside. The identification and logging is commensurate with the importance of the premises, data centres, sensitive designated areas, and the criticality of the operations or ICT systems located therein. (ii) The granting of physical access rights to critical ICT assets to authorised persons only, in accordance with the need-to-know and least privilege principles, and on an ad-hoc basis. (iii) The monitoring of physical access to premises, data centres, and sensitive designated areas identified by the financial entity where ICT and information assets or both reside. The monitoring shall be commensurate to the classification established in accordance with Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 and the criticality of the area accessed. (iv) The review of physical access rights to ensure that unnecessary access rights are promptly revoked.
ICT and security related requirements of the EBA/GL/2022/15 on Remote Customer Onboarding Solutions are implemented (in particular, para. 51-53).
Patch and vulnerability management is developed and implemented.
All patching processes are triggered and performed in timely manner.
Vulnerabilities are identified (incl. through vulnerability scanning), centrally documented, analysed, classified and patched accordingly within an acceptable timeframe, coherent with the ICT systems’ criticality.
Security reviews on the general information security controls, processes and procedures are carried out regularly (at least annually for critical systems and every 3 years for non-critical systems).
Security reviews cover the logical security (e.g. application and operating system level) including penetration testing of the interfaces or applications treating sensitive information or having a large impact in case of compromise.
Similarly, physical security (incl. appropriate redundancy levels) is regularly reviewed against best practices.
In order to provide objective and reliable results, security reviews are carried out by independent parties to maintain segregation of duties.
The supervised entity has, as part of the safeguards ensuring the security of networks against intrusions and data misuse, developed, documented, and implemented policies, procedures, protocols, and tools on network security management.
The policies, procedures, protocols, and tools on network security management cover: * the segregation and segmentation of ICT systems and networks * the use of a separate and dedicated network for the administration of ICT assets; * the identification and implementation of network access controls to prevent and detect connections to the financial entity’s network by any unauthorised device or system, or any endpoint not meeting the financial entity’s security requirements; * the measures to temporarily isolate, where necessary, subnetworks, and network components and devices.
The policies, procedures, protocols, and tools on network security management cover: * the encryption of network connections (internal and external); * the management and review of firewall rules and connections filters; * the securing of network traffic between the internal networks and the internet and other external connections; * the procedures to limit, lock, and terminate system and remote sessions after a specified period of inactivity.
The policies, procedures, protocols, and tools on network security management cover: * the documentation of all of the financial entity’s network connections and data flows; * the design of networks in line with the established ICT security requirements; * the performance of reviews of the network architecture and of the network security design to identify potential vulnerabilities; * the implementation of a secure configuration baseline of all network components, and the hardening of the network and of network devices.
The policies, procedures, protocols, and tools on network security management cover: * the identification and specification of ICT and information security measures, service levels, and management requirements of all network services (whether intra-group or external).
The supervised entity implemented appropriate policies, procedures, protocols and tools to protect data during network transmission and to assess compliance with the respective requirements.
Any maintenance is properly logged, including remote maintenance.
The supervised entity has implemented adequate protection against malware (e.g. antivirus, advanced malware prevention solutions, sandboxes).
The malware prevention technologies cover the endpoints (e.g. desktops, laptops, mobile devices) as well as the servers and the gateways communicating with the external world (e. g. mail gateway and web filter). For example, malware prevention on mobile devices can be achieved by equivalent lockdown and monitoring measures in accordance with the current industry best practice.
The malware prevention software is updated regularly and technical measures prevent end users from deactivating this.
The supervised entity has implemented appropriate procedures and security controls to secure the use of portable endpoint devices and private non-portable endpoint devices (in accordance with the requirements of the Article 11(2)(f) and (j) of the RTS on ICT risk management.
The supervised entity has implemented data protection procedures, protocols and tools (in accordance with the requirements of the Article 11(2)(e), (g) and (h) of RTS on ICT risk management.
As part of the safeguards against intrusions and data misuse, logging procedures, protocols and tools have been developed, documented, and implemented. The logging procedures, protocols, and tools contains all of the requirements in article 12(2) of the RTS on ICT risk management framework.
Efficiency of Security event logging and monitoring (SIEM) process is increased by the use of supporting technologies to correlate security events (e.g. Security Incident Event Management) and/or the use of dedicated teams (e.g. SOC - Security Operating Centre, CERT - Computer Emergency Response Team).
Security events generating an alert are promptly managed/treated via a coordinated security incident management process.
A cybersecurity incident response plan, which describes how to react in case of a cybersecurity incident, incorporating lessons learned, is in place and regularly updated.
The supervised entity collaborates with external entities (e.g. external computer emergency teams - CERTs, governmental authorities, telecommunication providers or ISPs, etc.) whenever required to respond to common and global cybersecurity incidents.
The Senior Management is timely informed about the ICT security incidents detected in the organisation including their consequences, organisation reaction and additional controls implemented..
As part of the safeguards to preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality of data, a physical and environmental security policy is defined, documented, and implemented. This policy is designed taking into account the cyber threat landscape, in accordance with the classification established in accordance with Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, and in light of the overall risk profile of ICT assets and accessible information assets.
The physical and environmental security policy contains measures to protect from attacks, accidents, and environmental threats and hazards, the premises, data centres of the financial entity, and sensitive designated areas identified by the financial entity, where ICT assets and information assets reside;
The physical and environmental security policy covers the following: * measures to secure ICT assets, both within and outside the premises of the financial entity, taking into account the results of the ICT risk assessment related to the relevant ICT assets and commensurate with their importance; * measures to ensure the availability, authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality of ICT assets, information assets, and physical access control devices of the financial entity through the appropriate maintenance (including measures to protect unattended ICT assets).
The physical and environmental security policy contains measures to preserve the availability, authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality of the data, including: * a clear desk policy for papers; * a clear screen policy for information processing facilities.
The supervised entity maintains documented, approved and enforced data classification policies and procedures, describing how to classify information based on confidentiality, integrity, availability and legal/ regulatory requirements (e.g. data protection).
In order to properly conduct the data classification, clear owners of the information (categories) are determined.
Data classification policies and procedures describe what measures are applied based on the classified criticality/sensitivity of the information and take into consideration the complete lifecycle of the ICT assets (e.g. measures applied when replacing, archiving, discarding or destroying ICT systems).
Security measures for the detection and prevention of data loss and leakages for systems and end-point devices are identified, implemented, properly managed and continuously monitored.
The supervised entity maintains an up-to-date inventory of all ICT assets/configuration items (software and hardware including outsourced assets) with at least the following level of detail: title, description, location, state, actual configuration, ownership and criticality of all ICT assets/ configuration items as well as their relationship among each other (e.g. upstream and downstream dependencies).
The inventory identifies the critical assets and the corresponding recovery requirements, and the interdependencies/ data flows between different assets.
Secure configuration baselines for ICT assets that minimise exposure of those ICT assets to cyber threats are established by defining a set of standard configuration setups and hardening rules and also measures to verify regularly that those baselines are effectively deployed. The supervised entity should have implemented security measures to ensure that only authorised software is installed according to Article 11 of the RTS on ICT risk management framework.
The supervised entity has implemented security measures to ensure that only authorised software is installed in accordance with Article 11(2)(c) of the RTS on ICT risk management..
The supervised entity backs up its ICT systems in line with a predefined backup policy, taking into account the applicable regulatory requirements, business recovery requirements, and the criticality of the underlying systems.
To ensure availability in case of disasters, backups are also stored at a different off-site location and sufficiently remote from the main one/primary hosting the ICT systems.
The management of the offsite storage facility complies with the data classification policy and the supervised entity’s media storage practices.
Depending on the sensitivity of the information involved, backups are encrypted to protect the information in case of loss or voluntary/accidental alteration.
Backups are regularly tested to ensure they are not corrupted.
The supervised entity has documented and implemented procedures to ensure the standard operations of its ICT systems. Such procedures include (but not limited to): job scheduling processes; logging and monitoring of ICT systems (systems are monitored at all times and automatic alerts are sent to dedicated teams ensuring continuous operations) allowing the detection, analysis and correction of errors, etc.
There exists capacity management monitoring processes to ensure system resources (e.g. CPU, RAM, Hard Disk space ...) are always in line with application(s) needs, they can cope with performance peaks and the supporting ICT assets are regularly reviewed, maintained and repaired as befitting their criticality.
Where applicable, there are appropriate shift handover processes (formal handover of activity, status updates, operational problems, escalation procedures and reports on current responsibilities) in order to support agreed-upon service levels and ensure continuous operations.
A documented process providing guidance on incident management is in place, which includes definition of roles and responsibilities such as the members of the crisis committee(s), as well as escalation procedures (i.e. chain of command in case of emergency).
Incidents and service requests are identified, logged (by way of dedicated service desk tools), categorized and prioritised according to business criticality and service agreements.
Notifications from detection systems are investigated in a timely manner and when required, response plans are swiftly executed and forensics are performed.
Major incidents are escalated to timely convey information for risk management and decision-making processes and may result in the activation of a disaster recovery/ business continuity plan.
If required, escalation might involve notification to relevant authorities.
A documented problem management process is in place, in order to identify and solve the common root cause and prevent future incidents from occurring by for example the use of early warning indicators. There is guidance on problem management processes, including definition of roles and responsibilities in case of escalation and/or crises, when the members of the crisis committee(s) are known, and the chain of command is known in case of security emergencies.
A formal and documented process is in place for managing and controlling changes to ICT systems.
Changes are defined, prioritised, formally approved, planned, tested and transitioned in a consistent and coordinated way.
Significant changes are scheduled for implementation and approved by a dedicated management committee.
Segregation of duties is applied throughout the different phases of the change process. In particular, development and testing are carried out on dedicated environments which are separated from the production environment.
Development and test environments do not contain confidential production data and test environments adequately reflect the production environment.
The deployment of changes into production environment is only conducted by authorised production teams after a formal change approval.
Changes to ICT security controls (e.g. to firewall rules) are authorised by relevant Information/ICT security managers (e.g. CISO) after having analysed the ICT security impacts.
A procedure is in place in order to manage emergency changes (changes requiring a quicker implementation due to critical/ blocking incidents) in a controlled environment and only upon formal documented approval.
A release management team that directs the ICT departments' decisions about production setting, ensuring a holistic view of changes to ICT systems, is in place.
A project management framework is in place for the management of all ICT projects covering as a minimum project objectives; roles and responsibilities; a project risk assessment; a project plan, timeframe and steps; key milestones and change management requirements as well as a proper analysis of information security requirements approved by a function that is independent from the development function.
Project governance and oversight processes are implemented to effectively support the management and monitoring of ICT projects (e.g. project management office, an ICT steering committee or equivalent) and include appropriate reporting of the establishment and progress of ICT projects and their associated risks to the management body at an adequate frequency.
Project oversight for the development of any critical system is assigned to the ICT steering committee.
The projects of the supervised entity are consistent with its strategy.
The projects are initiated with an approved scope, benefits, objectives and identified key stakeholders.
Dependencies between projects are identified, analysed, evaluated and managed by an overarching function.
A project independent quality assurance is implemented.
ICT standards and methodologies are defined and implemented to effectively govern and document the process of developing (including agile development and DevOps approach), acquiring, implementing and maintaining information systems and related technology (including technology infrastructure).
Information security (including cyber security) requirements are included in the requirements defined for new information systems or enhancements to existing information systems.
ICT security controls are implemented for all phases of the ICT solutions life cycle, starting from the design, development (incl. measures to protect the integrity of the source codes of ICT systems that are developed in-house), purchasing and testing phases and continuing through the operation phase.
The ICT solutions life cycle standards, methodologies and safeguards also apply to End User Computing (EUC).
Data quality management procedures, are defined, documented and tested.
Roles and responsibilities regarding data quality are clearly defined and implemented, including local data owners and a data governance function (e.g. Chief Data Office/r), responsible for: (i) issuing policies and guidelines; (ii) overseeing proper implementation of the data governance and quality framework throughout the organisation; (iii) ensuring the evaluation and monitoring of data quality through data quality processes; and (iv) participating in relevant change management processes (such as the mergers or acquisitions of material legal entities, outsourcing of services to third parties, the launch of new products and ICT change initiatives).
The supervised entity's human and technical resources are sufficient to support an adequate level of data quality.
Data quality management procedures include proper ICT controls (e.g. automated input validation controls, data transfer controls, reconciliation, etc.) for the different phases of the ICT data life cycle (e.g. designing the data architecture, building the data model and/or data dictionaries, verifying data inputs, controlling data extractions, transfers and processing, including rendered data outputs, backup, etc.). Please give details on the data quality tools/mechanisms adopted to support data quality management in Explanation, if any.
A formalised policy for management of End User Computing (EUC), for example to correctly identify, classify and protect all critical EUC assets and EUC-generated data, is in place and covers all business areas.
Data quality management procedures also apply to End User Computing (EUC).
The resolution processes of critical data quality issues are documented.
The supervised entity has defined and documented its data architecture, data models and data flows, and validated them with relevant business and ICT stakeholders.
The data architecture is regularly reviewed (and updated if needed).
Single golden (authoritative) sources are defined per risk category for data aggregation purposes.
The data architecture model includes data taxonomies / dictionary of the main business concepts and a metadata repository, which cover all material legal entities, business lines, material risks and material risk indicators, reports, and models.
As part of the overall business continuity policy, the supervised entity conducts business impact analyses (BIA) of its exposures to severe business disruptions. Under the BIA, the supervised entity assesses the potential impact of severe business disruptions by means of quantitative and qualitative criteria, using internal and external data and scenario analysis, as appropriate. The BIA considers the criticality of identified and mapped business functions, support processes, third-party dependencies and information assets, and their interdependencies.
The supervised entity ensures that ICT assets and ICT services are designed and used in full alignment with the BIA, in particular with regard to adequately ensuring the redundancy of all critical components.
As part of the ICT risk management framework referred to in Article 6(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 and based on the identification requirements set out in Article 8 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the supervised entity has in place a comprehensive ICT business continuity policy, which may be adopted as a dedicated specific policy, forming an integral part of the overall business continuity policy.
The supervised entity includes in the ICT business continuity policy a description of all of the following: (i) the objectives of the ICT business continuity policy, including the interrelation of ICT and overall business continuity, and considering the results of the business impact analysis (BIA); (ii) the scope of the ICT business continuity arrangements, plans, procedures, and mechanisms, including limitations and exclusions; (iii) the timeframe to be covered by the ICT business continuity arrangements, plans, procedures, and mechanisms; (iv) the criteria to activate and deactivate ICT business continuity plans, ICT response and recovery plans, and crisis communications plans.
The supervised entity includes in the ICT business continuity policy provisions on: (i) the governance and organisation to implement the ICT business continuity policy, including roles, responsibilities and escalation procedures ensuring that sufficient resources are available; (ii) the alignment of the ICT business continuity policy to the communication policy referred to in Article 14(2) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, and to the communication and crisis communication actions referred to in Article 11(2)(e), of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
The supervised entity includes in the ICT business continuity policy provisions on: (i) the alignment between the ICT business continuity plans and the overall business continuity plans, concerning potential failure scenarios, including the scenarios referred to in Article 26(2) of the RTS on ICT risk management, and concerning recovery objectives, specifying that the financial entity shall be able to recover the operations of its critical or important functions after disruptions within a recovery time objective and a recovery point objective; (ii) the development of ICT business continuity plans for severe business disruptions as part of those plans, and the prioritisation of ICT business continuity actions using a risk-based approach.
The supervised entity includes in the ICT business continuity policy provisions on: (i) the development, testing and review of ICT response and recovery plans, in accordance with Articles 25 and 26 of the RTS on ICT risk management; (ii) the review of the effectiveness of the implemented ICT business continuity arrangements, plans, procedures and mechanisms, in accordance with Article 26 of the RTS on ICT risk management.
The supervised entity has implemented the ICT business continuity policy through dedicated, appropriate and documented arrangements, plans, procedures and mechanisms aiming to: (a) ensure the continuity of the financial entity’s critical or important functions; (b) quickly, appropriately and effectively respond to, and resolve, all ICT-related incidents in a way that limits damage and prioritises the resumption of activities and recovery actions; (c) activate, without delay, dedicated plans that enable containment measures, processes and technologies suited to each type of ICT-related incident and prevent further damage, as well as tailored response and recovery procedures established in accordance with Article 12 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554; (d) estimate preliminary impacts, damages and losses; (e) set out communication and crisis management actions that ensure that updated information is transmitted to all relevant internal staff and external stakeholders in accordance with Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, and report to the competent authorities in accordance with Article 19 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
As part of the ICT risk management framework referred to in Article 6(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the supervised entity has implemented associated ICT response and recovery plans which are subject to independent internal audit reviews.
The supervised entity has in place, maintains and periodically tests appropriate ICT business continuity plans, notably with regard to critical or important functions outsourced or contracted through arrangements with ICT third-party service providers.
When developing the ICT response and recovery plans referred to in Article 11(3) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the supervised entity takes into account the results of its business impact analysis (BIA). Those ICT response and recovery plans: (a) specify the conditions prompting their activation or deactivation, and any exceptions for such activation or deactivation; (b) describe what actions are to be taken to ensure the availability, integrity, continuity, and recovery of at least ICT systems and services supporting critical or important functions of the financial entity; (c) are designed to meet the recovery objectives of the operations of the financial entities; (d) are documented and made available to the staff involved in the execution of ICT response and recovery plans and be readily accessible in case of emergency, clearly specifying roles and responsibilities; (e) provide for both short-term and long-term recovery options, including partial systems recovery; (f) lay down the objectives of ICT response and recovery plans and the conditions to declare a successful execution of those plans.
The ICT response and recovery plans identify relevant scenarios, including scenarios of severe business disruptions and increased likelihood of occurrence of disruption. Those plans develop scenarios based on current information on threats and on lessons learned from previous occurrences of business disruptions. The supervised entity duly takes into account all of the following scenarios: (a) cyber-attacks and switchovers between the primary ICT infrastructure and the redundant capacity, backups, and redundant facilities; (b) scenarios in which the quality of the provision of a critical or important function deteriorates to an unacceptable level or fails, and duly consider the potential impact of the insolvency, or other failures, of any relevant ICT third-party service provider; (c) partial or total failure of premises, including office and business premises, and data centres; (d) substantial failure of ICT assets or of the communication infrastructure; (e) the non-availability of a critical number of staff or staff members in charge of guaranteeing the continuity of operations; (f) impact of climate change and environment degradation related events, natural disasters, pandemics, and physical attacks, including intrusions and terrorist attacks; (g) insider attacks; (h) political and social instability, including, where relevant, in the ICT third-party service provider’s jurisdiction and the location where the data are stored and processed; (i) widespread power outages.
Where the primary recovery measures may not be feasible in the short term because of costs, risks, logistics, or unforeseen circumstances, the ICT response and recovery plans referred to in Article 26(1) of the RTS on ICT risk management framework consider alternative options.
As part of the ICT response and recovery plans referred to in Article 26(1) of the RTS on ICT risk management framework, the supervised entity considers and implements continuity measures to mitigate failures of ICT third-party service providers of ICT services supporting critical or important functions.
As part of its comprehensive ICT risk management, the supervised entity tests the ICT business continuity plans and the ICT response and recovery plans in relation to ICT systems supporting all functions at least yearly, as well as in the event of any substantive changes to ICT systems supporting critical or important functions. These tests include scenarios of cyber-attacks and switchovers between the primary ICT infrastructure and the redundant capacity, backups and redundant facilities necessary to meet the obligations set out in Article 12 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
When testing the ICT business continuity plans in accordance with Article 11(6) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the supervised entity takes into account the financial entity’s business impact analysis (BIA) and the ICT risk assessment referred to in Article 3(1)(b) of the RTS on ICT risk management framework, and documents the results of the testing. Any identified deficiencies resulting from that testing are analysed, addressed, and reported to the management body.
The supervised entity assesses through the testing of its ICT business continuity plans whether ICT is able to ensure the continuity of the supervised entity’s critical or important functions. That testing: (a) is performed on the basis of test scenarios that simulate potential disruptions, including an adequate set of severe but plausible scenarios, and including the scenarios considered for the development of the business continuity plans; (b) contains the testing of ICT services provided by ICT third-party service providers, duly considering scenarios linked to insolvency or failures of the ICT third-party service providers or linked to political risks in the ICT third-party service providers’ jurisdictions, where relevant; (c) contains scenarios of switchover from primary ICT infrastructure to the redundant capacity, backups and redundant facilities, verifying whether at least critical or important functions can be operated appropriately for a sufficient period of time, and whether the normal functioning may be restored; (d) is designed to challenge the assumptions on which the business continuity plans are based, including governance arrangements and crisis communication plans; (e) contains procedures to verify the ability of the supervised entity’s staff, of ICT third-party service providers, of ICT systems, and ICT services to respond adequately to the scenarios duly taken into account in accordance with Article 26(2) of the RTS on ICT risk management framework.
As part of its comprehensive ICT risk management, the supervised entity tests the crisis communication plans established in accordance with Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
The supervised entity regularly reviews its ICT business continuity policy and ICT response and recovery plans, taking into account the results of tests carried out, and recommendations stemming from audit checks or supervisory reviews.
The supervised entity keeps readily accessible records of activities before and during disruption events when their ICT business continuity plans and ICT response and recovery plans are activated.
The supervised entity has implemented a crisis management function, which, in the event of activation of the ICT business continuity plans or ICT response and recovery plans, inter alia, sets out clear procedures to manage internal and external crisis communications in accordance with Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554.
As part of the ICT risk management framework referred to in Article 6(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the supervised entity has in place crisis communication plans enabling a responsible disclosure of, at least, major ICT-related incidents or vulnerabilities to clients and counterparts as well as to the public, as appropriate.
As part of the ICT risk management framework, the supervised entity has implemented communication policies for internal staff and for external stakeholders. Communication policies for staff shall take into account the need to differentiate between staff involved in ICT risk management, in particular the staff responsible for response and recovery, and staff that needs to be informed.
At least one person in the supervised entity is tasked with implementing the communication strategy for ICT- related incidents and fulfil the public and media function for that purpose.
